Jonathan, Ralph, and Charlie,
welcome or welcome back depending on which one of you are here in this.
Welcome to the show you all.
It's awesome to have you on Talk Python To Me.
Thanks for having us.
Thanks for having us Michael.
We're going to dive in deep to Python packaging and
really look at how the needs of Python packaging have evolved.
What you all as well as a bunch of other people,
I see very long contributor lists on these peps.
So a lot of people involved in this project.
Really great.
So let's get into it.
Before we do, let's just do a quick round of intros for you all.
I guess go around clockwise.
Jonathan, you go first.
So I work at NVIDIA for, I think, the better of eight years
right now.
I did all kinds of different roles, but very recently,
I mean, over the last two something years,
I moved into improving our CUDA and Python offering,
trying to find better ways to expose GPU programming,
essentially, at the Python layer.
And I think for a little bit over a year,
I've been working with Ralph and Charlie
over multiple proposals to improve Python packaging,
initiative call we are next and i think we'll talk a little bit more about this so excited to be on
the show today yeah excited to have you you have really seen the roller coaster at nvidia i'm sure
right it was like when you start yeah it was like gaming and probably some data science and then
all all the changes and now just center of the universe so i'm sure it is exciting
you know the funny thing is i i wanted to join nvidia since 15 years
and I need a PhD to actually be able to join NVIDIA.
That is so awesome.
I love it.
I was amazed by the CUDA technology
when I was in high school
and I was like,
ah, this is so incredible, the concept.
And I wanted to join,
so I'm happy I was able to make this happen.
Yeah.
You know, CUDA is going to be an important part
of this discussion.
Not the only part,
but it certainly is one of the forcing functions
for the things happening here.
Give people the background on CUDA.
What is it?
How does it work?
Why is it so amazing?
Well, CUDA is essentially a programming language
that allows you to program on GPUs, specifically NVIDIA GPUs,
and has a different programming model
than what you would usually do in CE.
Because GPUs are fundamentally very different than CPUs,
you have to program them with a different mindset.
Like, for example, the biggest important thing when you start with GPU
is to not think about a single thread executing the instruction,
but like, how can you massively parallel a task on like thousands of threads at the single?
And it takes a different perspective and mode of thinking to how can you imagine doing a task on so many threads at the same time.
We're not used to it as classic computer scientists.
If anything, multi-threading is something
that we tend to shy away from because there's a lot of caveats.
But well, GPU programming is all about how can you
have as many threads as possible.
Yeah, yeah.
It comes from graphics and videos where this pixel is computed
independently of that pixel.
And we've got 5K resolution.
So let's just break that up, right?
Yeah, it's exactly the idea.
And now we have this reasonably new model that's called Tile Programming that abstracts it even more,
which essentially instead of thinking about threads and blocks and grids,
you think in terms of Tile, so kind of a mini representation that you could have in mind.
And that thing can scale and adapt differently
on different hardware.
So pretty cool.
But yeah.
Yeah, that is amazing.
People think that their CPU has a lot of cores.
It's got nothing on the graphics cards.
Well, yeah.
It's a different type of hardware.
Reach is a different objective.
Yeah, well, very cool.
Very cool.
And what a journey if you did all that work to get there.
Absolutely love it.
Ralph, welcome.
Hello.
Yeah.
Thanks, Michael.
Great to be here.
So about me, I am a physicist by training.
I did a PhD in atomic and quantum physics.
Worked in the semiconductor industry in a while.
And I rolled into scientific computing due to that.
I started using Python in 2004 and used the mailing list at that point because there was, I mean, NumPy didn't exist yet.
There was no documentation for anything.
So you had to join a mailing list.
That's how I rolled into open source early on.
I became the release manager of NumPy and SciPy in 2010.
And yeah, I've been kind of doing that ever since
as a volunteer for 10 years and then I got really too much.
So I made it my job.
I joined QuantSight, which is a small consulting company
primarily around like data science,
applied AI, scientific computing.
And yeah, I'm now one of the two co-CEOs of QuantSight.
- Awesome.
- I'm trying to, basically, we just converted last year
to a public benefit corporation,
which is very much aligned with what, you know,
most of our team wants to do.
Most of them are open source maintainers.
And yeah, we basically do consulting to allow ourselves
to make impactful open source contributions.
- QuantSight is doing a ton in the data science space,
scientific computing space for sure.
I've had multiple rounds of QuantSight folks on the show
and things like that and very neat.
- Yeah, it's a lot of fun and rewarding.
So yeah, glad to be here.
- Yeah, it's an interesting transition going from a science
or something along those lines into programming, right?
I got into it through working in my math research and so on.
And actually this is just more fun.
I'm just going to do programming.
It's not exactly physics, but it's pretty similar.
Yeah.
I mean, I've always liked both, but I did experimental physics,
and there it's like, you know, you have much less control
over what you end up producing.
You know, building and using lasers in the lab, if one broke,
maybe I had to send it off for repairs and wait a month, right?
What do you do in the meantime?
You program.
So, you know, that's one of the nicer things about it.
And yeah, gradually started with like,
even before Python, there was some MATLAB
and then you roll into open source
and then mostly just Python a bit of C
and you kind of like go down from there
and then you encounter packaging
and it's one of those things that like only 5% of people like
and the rest see it as a chore, but yeah,
when you like it, you just have to do more and more.
- Yeah, you're with your people now, I think on this call,
that's for sure.
Hey, Charlie, do we even need to give you an introduction?
just say uv and then go on or no, please, please do. I'm just kidding. But the reason I say that
is uv has taken the world by storm really. And congratulations. And yeah, tell people about
thank you. Yeah, of course. So my name is Charlie. I'm the founder and CEO of Astral.
I've been working on the company for, let's see, started the company in October, 2022. That's the
easier way to do it. So I've been working on this for a few years. We mostly build open source. So
we've worked on a couple of different tools that have become quite popular in Python. So we build
rough, which is our linter and formatter, ty, which is our type checker. And then most relevant for
this episode would be uv, which is our Python package and project manager. So yeah, we spend
all our time thinking about how to build tools that make it easier and to work with Python and
how to make Python programming more productive.
A lot of that's about speed.
We try to build things that are really fast,
but it's also about user experience
and trying to sort of like take complexity
out of the critical path for users.
So, you know, for example,
we've definitely spent a lot of time
thinking about how we can make it easier
for people to install PyTorch,
which is, you know, one of the examples
that will come up, I'm sure, you know,
over the course of the show
and one of the motivating examples
for the peps we've been working on.
So yeah, that's why I'm here.
We've been collaborating with Jonathan, Ralph,
and honestly, like a bunch of other people too.
It's been a really big effort
and I'm sure we'll get into that.
But it's been cool to have this long running
and very like wide ranging collaboration
around trying to push Python packaging forward.
Yeah.
Well, like I said, congrats on all the stuff with Astral.
And we're going to talk a little bit about pyx, I think.
Maybe see if there's any,
just to check in at the end of the show
after we talk about some of these things, I think, if you're up for it.
Yeah, sounds good.
Yeah, awesome.
All right.
Well, let me switch around.
So one of the challenges, I mean, let's just start with what is the challenge?
You all have described this as the lowest common denominator packaging problem
that we've got to deal with.
the idea or the problem is different cpus have specialized instructions different graphics cards
all these different compute and platforms and so on might have specific instructions but
and they're optimized right like do this as vectors operations instead of on registers or
whatever and then but maybe some other thing that it might run on doesn't support that right i don't
WebAssembly whatever yeah yeah and so then how how do you actually end up shipping something
to python people that takes advantages of the specializations that are there
when they're there but without breaking the other ones right that's kind of the core problem is that
right yeah i think one one little step back before if you if you think about it like a wheel when
when you take the Python package that we have everywhere,
there is a few parts of the file names
that essentially allows you to know what's been built for.
So inside this you have, if it's a pure Python package,
it's simple, you might have a minimum Python version,
but in most cases it's pretty generic,
so that's not an issue.
When you start having compiled code inside the package,
that's a different story,
because now we're talking about
what kind of OS it was built for.
So Windows, macOS, Linux, different flavors.
We're talking about the type of CPU that it was built for.
So X86, ARM, PowerPC, potentially RISC-V,
all these things, mobile.
And then finally the Python API.
And in most cases,
it means the minimum Python API that you need.
So, and for people,
an API is essentially the same as an API,
but for a binary.
So it's important when things are stable at the ABI level
because it allows you to be future compatible.
What does ABI mean?
Jonathan, help us out.
What does ABI mean for those of us who don't know?
Application binary interface, so it's the same as API,
but instead of specifically for binaries.
And the problem that we collectively kind of try to get
to is that, well, today the compute space
and the scientific computing space,
which if we take the latest JetBrains Python developer survey
is at least 40 to 50% of the Python developers
are essentially doing data science or similar.
So it's a massive percentage of the community
is doing in some form scientific computing
to whatever extent you may want to think about it.
And while the problem is when we do these things,
we try to do them fast because who
likes to wait on the return of some Pandas operation
on NIMPI or PyTorch operation.
But to go fast, you need to use all the tricks in the books
that you can get to essentially--
you have to optimize the binary for a specific CPU,
for a specific GPU, or for a specific library
that you want to use, like BLAS.
BLAS is a general concept.
So which blast implementation do you use or MPI?
And the problem is, well, we don't have the tags
or markers to allow us to essentially flag
this specific binary to be compatible with X, Y, and Z.
- Right, so the wheel might say, this is for 3.14,
it is for ARM CPUs and so on,
but it's not gonna say,
And it supports this vectorization optimization on Intel chips.
I just said ARM, didn't I?
Let's go with Apple Silicon.
A very good example of ARM is that the default most people build with is actually a Raspberry Pi.
ARM level.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And you can imagine that when you build for any type of desktop CPU, ARM, you have a little bit more complex CPUs.
CPUs and a little bit more advanced chips.
And it's a lot of performance that you leave on the table
by not optimizing for a specific platform.
So obviously, in some cases, it doesn't really matter.
But in other cases, it does really matter.
And we want to be able to do that.
I'll give a very concrete example.
Like, Intel x86-64 is kind of the most common, I think,
CPU that most people will have at home, right?
If you build a wheel for that, you can only use CPU features, performance CPU features that go back to about 2009.
Any new hardware features that were introduced after 2009, things like, you know, SSE4, AVX2, you know, later versions of that, you just cannot use because the installers don't know that you put that in the wheel.
And hence, they will also install it on computers that don't have those instructions.
Right. And then you just get like very ugly crashes.
Hence, what we all do is we ship wheels, binaries that are only compatible with 2009.
And the difference between the 2009 hardware features and, you know, the 2019 or 2023 one
could be a factor of 10x, 20x in performance, depending on what you're doing.
10x to 20x?
Oh, yeah.
For, you know, especially when you work with scientific data and SIMD instructions.
Yeah, you can you can get massive performance increases.
If you heard of vectorization, this is a huge deal.
Yeah, I mean, I guess the way I think about it from our perspective of building like
because because these problems, like one of the things that's very hard about solving them,
and it has required like us to be so collaborative across the industry
is that it touches basically every piece of the Python packaging stack.
It impacts how you build things, how the registries work,
what they support, how installers choose what to install.
And so for us, it's like the superpower of Python,
I think in some ways, sorry, I think the superpower of Python in some ways
is like you can build and distribute all this software that's built for, you know, that uses
native code. Like you can take native code and you can distribute it out to users and they can run
it just like it's any other piece of Python code. And in the spec, we have these things like, okay,
you can build a wheel that targets Windows or Linux or macOS, and it can target like x86 or
arm or whatever else. And those are all captured in the spec. And so for us, like building uv,
we know how to detect those things, how to figure out like which wheel to install based on what the
user's machine is running. But there's all this other stuff that's not captured by any of those
standards, like the instruction set, or even like the supported CUDA version, like all these things
are not captured in that wheel file. And the installers don't know how to detect them. They
don't know how to figure out like, okay, which PyTorch build should I use based on the CUDA
a version on the user's machine.
All that stuff is lost.
And that's the gap that we're trying to bridge.
ANDREAS SULLIVAN: And part of the philosophy is also--
so right now, Python packaging exposed what
is called platform tags.
So essentially, a sort of mini tag that
comes with a specific definition that installers
know how to resolve.
And what we're trying to evolve is
to end up creating 200 more today, and 200 more in two years,
and 200 more again in four years.
So we try to come up with a generic system that will allow you to essentially include
the arbitrary definition that then resolvers and package managers can then understand by
some sort of mechanism and resolve, but not create a sort of blessed list of things that
you constantly have to update because it's a lot of maintenance.
Yeah, that's how we got into the situation now, right?
because there's one for the version,
there's one for the architecture of the CPU,
but then there's not a spot for the other stuff.
So the overall idea is to say almost just a metadata section
in there and things can read it or ignore it as they see fit.
- Conceptually, yeah, a little bit.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's like, I guess the question is like, okay,
if we have this like huge space of things
that we might possibly want to detect
condition installs on. Like, okay, anytime someone publishes a wheel for Python, they should now tell
us what CUDA version is it built for? If any, what CPU instruction sets does it support? Blah, blah,
blah. Where would we put all that stuff? Becomes the question. It's like, what, are we just going
to keep expanding the platform tag and everything else? And that's the problem that we're trying to
solve in a generic way. Yeah, you can end up with a file name that's 4,000 characters wide or
or something.
They can already get pretty long, by the way.
But yeah, that's...
If we have any changes, we have to work around that in uv sometimes, file name length limits.
But yeah, it's actually a very famous package that used, I think, 200 first digits of Pi
as the version number.
Oh, my gosh.
It's a pretty good joke.
I didn't know about it.
There's somebody on discuss.hython.org that posted the link, and I was like, but that's
hilarious.
That is wild.
So before we dive into what you all are proposing,
let's maybe talk about how just a couple of packages
or libraries solve this problem now
in maybe different directions.
So Ralph, what about NumPy?
I mean, you talked about vectorization and stuff.
Yeah.
That's so in line with NumPy, right?
Is NumPy like--
Yes.
And pandas, that's the way.
NumPy, yes.
Pandas, no.
So NumPy does contain SMD instructions and you know because it's incredibly useful for
performance. NumPy has all large arrays and basic instructions on them that have direct hardware
implementations typically. But the way it's done is incredibly complex because you need to end up
with a wheel that works on every type of CPU, right?
We didn't, you know, I'll stay with x86, but the same happens on the other platforms, right?
You know, it needs to run on a 2010 CPU and it needs to run better on a 2024 CPU.
So what we do in NumPy is we have a system that basically allows you to
either parameterize a source file that, you know, and then rebuild it multiple times, you know,
four different particular CPU architectures.
So like a Haswell family and then a Skylake family and so on.
And then we basically merge that together
in a single Python extension module.
And then at runtime, we have our own code to detect the CPU
and basically then some like dispatch shim layer
that kind of fishes out the right family
from the extension module.
So yeah, you put up the diagram there.
It's pretty complicated.
And I'd say there I've been collaborating with some of the, you know,
world experts on this.
We had like an in the end,
this was only successful because we built a generic architecture
that other experts per, you know, CPU architecture could come and contribute to.
So we now have a specific team of like four people.
that helped maintain the architecture.
But then Intel for years paid one of their engineers
to optimize specifically the x86 code path.
And then ARM has a NumPy maintainer
who got commit writes a few years ago.
And he's the final authority
on all the ARM instructions that are in there.
So that whole complicated thing is now shipped
and it's extremely good for performance.
but you can see how this is not a scalable process
to do in many batches.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Plus, if you compile everything five times,
you get a binary that's not five times bigger,
but it's a lot bigger.
So it's not great for users as well.
- Yeah, actually the nickname for these things
are called Fat Bin.
So you have the idea for why they'll go that way,
because they tend to be pretty heavy to download.
- Yeah, yeah.
Instead of wheels, you got big wheels.
So what happens if all these changes get adopted
and it doesn't need to be compiled into one giant binary?
Are all these maintainers still working
and they just don't have to deal with trying to compile
and boot it all into one thing?
They might still have to do--
yes, I think essentially you're correct.
You still need to write the actual code that
uses the SIMD instructions.
But then you can just produce a wheel that says,
OK, it works on this specific CPU architecture.
And just ignore this code if I'm building
architecture and all the, you know, detecting the CPU at runtime and the dynamic dispatch
features you all don't need.
Will it make the code faster?
It will.
Well, will you have a better cache?
Will there be smaller stuff in memory?
You know, that kind of stuff.
I don't think it will make the NumPy code much faster.
It will, you know, it will make a huge difference for all the other packages that don't have
this amount of complexity today.
So like SciPy, scikit-learn, Pandas, Pillow,
like none of these packages actually use SIMD code.
And for SciPy, it's the easiest for me to talk about
'cause I'm also a SciPy maintainer.
We actually have a lot of code that, you know,
got vendored in from somehow like Fourier transforms,
for example, they benefit a lot as well.
We have AVX2 and ARM Neon implementations,
but we just don't build them and don't ship that as wheels
because we have no way of doing that.
As soon as we have, you know, wheel variants,
we can say, okay, let's ship two sets of wheels.
I mean, that's more CI jobs to build more wheels,
but you know, when it's worth it, you know,
you can make that trade off, right?
Like we already have the code.
We just have to change a build option,
produce a different wheel and ship it.
- So do you just set up something like a,
on hash if def sort of thing for like,
if defs this capability,
else you put in the generic code.
Exactly.
Yeah, the C code is basically just a bunch of if-defs.
And if you only--
for maintainability reasons, you only add more if-defs
if it's really much faster.
You're not going to do it for 10% or 20% faster.
But if it's 2x faster, well, why not have an extra else branch?
Yeah, absolutely.
Charlie, does Rust have a hash if-def equivalent?
It must, right?
Yeah, you can do--
it has directives like that yeah but you guys don't really need to worry about using this for
yourself this is more for the things that you service providing to everyone right yeah um
yeah this is mostly this wouldn't have a huge impact on uv or um i mean it could have some
small impact but i think i think largely this is about yeah how can we make it easier for users to
consume this stuff. And I mean, the NumPy, like this is a good example of how it affects
like build and distribution, because yes, they still have to write like architecture specific
code if they want to get these optimizations. But what we'll be doing with these proposals is making
it much easier for them to ship separate builds that are like dedicated for each of those different
variants. So like the end user, you know, will get access to it. But in this case, it's like the
bottleneck is or part of the bottleneck is like all the complexity it puts on the maintainers and
the people publishing yeah how much do you think it would impact the performance to ship python
standalone with different cpu extension oh um that is a good question jonathan so we'd actually like
to do uh um i don't know that i have a great answer to that i mean this they like a good
quantitative answer to it. I think we are very interested in doing stuff like that. We've also
considered, for example, shipping a build, like we ship with a relatively old like glibc minimum,
we've considered shipping a build, a variant, not in the sense of the tab, sorry, a different build,
let me just put it that way, that uses a more modern glibc version, for example.
We do run into other problems with that, like our build matrix is really big, we have to split it
across multiple GitHub actions now.
And so we just have a lot of builds.
So we're worried about doubling the size of the build matrix,
for example, but that's a separate problem.
But yes, it could actually be helpful there,
although we don't ship those as wheels today.
Yeah, that's awesome.
In a very interesting angle to think about how much leverage--
I mean, this is probably something you've thought about.
But how much leverage you and your team actually
have on Python performance by how you control Python Build
Standalone.
Maybe just tell people, what is the relevance there?
What is Python Build Standalone, and how does this even
apply to what we're talking about?
Oh, yeah, sure.
I use it every day.
I love it.
A lot of people use it and don't even know.
I mean, it's probably the least public or direct user
facing thing that we do.
But we took over a maintenance of a project called Python Build
standalone, probably like a year ago, maybe a little more. And that project, the basic idea is
like typically when you build CPython, you know, at least like on Linux, for example,
a bunch of absolute paths get embedded into the binary, which makes it hard to build like
reproducible and relocatable CPythons. Like it's hard for someone to build a CPython that you can
then download and run on your machine. You typically need to build it on your own machine.
So what this project does is it's sort of like a fork of the CPython build system.
It's like the CPython build system with a bunch of patches and other changes applied on top.
And it makes it so that we can build Pythons that you can just download, unzip, and run.
So when you install Python with uv, and these are also used in Bazel and a bunch of other tools,
we don't actually build Python from source.
We actually download, unzip, and run Python, which just makes it much easier.
It means it's faster.
You don't have to have the build tool chain on your machine.
You don't run into problems around failing to build it or anything like that.
But the other thing that's been cool about that project, at least recently,
is we've been very focused on performance.
So on actually just trying to make sure that we're distributing.
Our goal is to be the fastest Python distribution,
even without changing CPython source code,
just changing how we build it and various things that we can tweak there.
So we've been working on a bunch of benchmarks around.
I do think we have the fastest Python now,
but we haven't actually published our rigorous benchmark methodology.
So I won't stake my reputation on that claim yet,
but we've been very focused on it.
And it's been a cool point of leverage because like we can just,
yeah, if we can make Python, you know,
if we can put out a Python distribution that's like 10 or 15% faster,
you know, just by changing how we build it.
Yeah, it's a big lever for impact.
Yeah, it's a huge lever.
And I hadn't really thought about it being a lever until Jonathan brought it up.
It's not directly impacted by this because we don't ship it.
I guess for the reason that we don't ship it as a wheel.
Although someday we potentially could.
Right now they're just files that uv knows how to install, basically.
But it's the same logic at the core.
Once you start tweaking the packaging of Python packages,
the next part you want to tweak is your Python install.
Yeah.
Well, for example, all of my stuff that runs on the servers,
all in Docker and it has a base Docker image and one of the very first lines is
you know installed use curl plus the shell to install uv the next line is uv
V and V and that that installs Python from Python build standalone and then
whatever you need to make an actual app out of that afterwards right and so how
many people are doing that I if it seems like a huge portion of the world has
adopted uv for sort of bootstrapping Python instead of the other way.
So that's why it's such a big lever, right?
Yep. Yeah, exactly.
All right.
As a way to sort of get into the peps, Charlie, you mentioned variants.
You're like, wait, wait, wait, not that variant.
What variant are we talking about that's not that variant?
What is that variant, I guess, that we're not talking about in uv?
or Python build standalone.
Who wants to take that?
Ralph, do you want to take that?
I'm not actually sure what the question is here.
I think you were targeted for the question.
Water variant?
Yeah, yeah.
No, that's fine.
I mean, like, so we use,
so the PEP revolves around this concept of wheel variants.
And the idea is you can have,
I'll keep using the word variants.
You can have different variants,
different builds of a wheel that are intended to be installed based on properties that are
known or detected on the machine. So for example, that could be like, okay, what NVIDIA drivers do
you have on your machine? What are the versions of those drivers? Because that implies things about
what versions of the CUDA runtime you can use. And so when someone publishes a wheel, maybe that wheel
leverages CUDA and needs to be built against CUDA and needs to be built in a way that leverages CUDA.
And so they might publish different variants, effectively just slightly different versions of
versions is wrong, different variants, slightly different flavors of that package that are all
built against different CUDA versions. And so we would call those different variants.
Okay. It's a--
Please correct me.
across what I understand the packaging space,
even outside of Python.
If you type variants in general,
we try to reuse the terminology
that ends up being pretty widely adopted
in the packaging ecosystem,
not Python packaging, the packaging at large.
Variants is the name that you'll find around
for this kind of concept.
Related to that,
especially in the astral flavor these days,
but also in many other areas.
I feel like crates and Rust,
what they've done with their packaging system
has kind of influenced some of the things
we're adopting in the Python world.
Has anything from the Rust world influenced
these peps that we're about to talk about?
Well, crates are source distribution, though, mostly.
Yeah.
In this case, we're talking about actually binary distribution.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So not really.
Okay.
But in a sense...
That's actually interesting, right?
Yes.
Because a lot of the best packaging systems, whether it's Rust or Nix, they start from source,
and they know exactly what's in the box.
And then binaries are kind of like an optimization, right?
It's like you have a thing that you know exactly what is the binary, and you can check, like,
oh, I don't have to build this thing from source,
I can grab a binary somewhere.
Python packaging is absolutely not like that.
Like if you build a wheel and you have an S-dist,
I mean, you have no idea if they're the same thing.
If you, you know, you cannot rebuild the wheel
from the S-dist unless you use very,
very well predefined constraints.
- Yeah, yeah, I hadn't really thought about that either,
but that is an interesting juxtaposition.
Like the binary stuff that is all binary
shipping a source but the interpreted stuff is shipping as binary and I think
part of the reason or maybe the main reason is before talking about binary
stuff for rust well it's all rust that's compiled but for Python it's this mix
this crazy mix of all these different libraries that are not none of them are
Python but they're all binary in the end and so you've got to get around the
fact like well I don't have a Fortran and a Haskell compiler so I can't run
project you know there's something quite amazing to python in general which is called the cffi
so the c foreign function interface which essentially allows you to build any sort of
application you want in whatever language as long as you're compatible with cffi standard
you can call it from python and it's incredible and amazingly useful um but to come back on what
Ralph was saying that a lot of the design actually from We Are Variant has been inspired by a
system that is called SPAC that was designed for supercomputers. And we use this especially
around the design of CPU variants to kind of get a lot of inspiration around a package called
our spec that is just from my perspective pure brilliance in some of design um just my words but
in my opinion but but i i really think they got the thing right it's it's it's just beautifully
designed everything is static in json fired and it's extremely easy to to scale and maintain um
but yes if you if you take all the kind of system designed to support the most specific
like deployment scenarios like SPAC, like Nix, or even in some cases, Cargo,
well, they mostly ship sources to go around this variant problem because that allows you to control
the entire build chain, essentially. And in some cases, maybe Ralph can talk about it, but Conda
Forge also kind of take an approach that is similar to Nix to kind of go around these issues a little
bit maybe ralph if you want to talk about not quite because conda and connor forge don't do
source distributions at all right and they just take a release and they build binaries and if
there are no binaries you can't install it uh but yeah i would say that's a good point right we have
people that worked on all these systems like uh one of jonathan's colleagues at nvidia mike saran
used to work on conda i contribute to connor forge as well and like so we have some of the some
ideas that originally came from conda some that came from spec and like you know the end result
is nothing like you know not exactly like any of those systems but it takes some of the best
aspects of them to enhance python packaging
not reinventing the wheel i mean maybe but not too much yeah not too much
but it's kind of it's it's it's cool because i think um
I feel like a lot of this work really got kicked off.
We did an in-person summit.
And I honestly can't remember when that was because my mind is so blurred.
March 2025.
Thank you.
Okay, so it was about a year ago.
And there's a bunch of notes about this.
And we had people from probably like, I don't know, I'd have to guess 20 different companies, maybe more, all in person for a day.
Just talking about these problems.
and a bunch of people presented on their own open source projects and how they intersect
with like we had people from PyTorch, people from the JAX team, just talking about like how,
what their concerns are, like what's working well for them, what's not. And so, you know,
similarly to how we've, I think a lot of the design has really been influenced by
like what are other designs, what's the prior art and like what's working well.
You know, a lot of it was also informed by like just talking to a bunch of people across the
industry and understanding what their concerns are.
And so at least from my perspective,
honestly, by calendar time, I have not
been involved in Python that long.
But it's been definitely the most cross-company,
cross-project, cross-organization effort
I've been involved in by a lot.
We tried to replicate a model that I really
like in the Python community that was PyStasy Python.
We tried to philosophically create the packaging child
of faster CPython.
And that's how we created We Are Next.
It was all the amazing work that the faster CPython
community did on the CPython side,
and kind of creating the same synergy
but around Python packaging.
And that's why--
OK.
I would almost say it's even quite a bit more diverse.
at least my understanding is faster supply thinners
primarily like funded and created by Microsoft
and it kind of turned into a community thing.
But like all the money came from Microsoft, I think.
- I think the majority of the people were working
in a team inside Microsoft at least.
- Yeah, and here we've got Nvidia,
Meta, the PyTorch folks at Meta.
We got some contributions from AMD and Intel
and then Astrol, QuantSight,
A large amount of the time that we've been able to spend at QuantSight
came from funding from Red Hat, who came with their own problem sets.
And that's just the most prominent contributor.
So there's at least 10 companies that started investing in this
because it solves so many problems.
Yeah, that's really encouraging as well.
If you go on the menu on the left side, you'll see a section called Who We Are.
Yeah, so I pulled up this project, Wheel Next.
And Ralph--
Yeah, who are we?
And you'll see all the names of the companies.
and the name of also the open source project
that contributed time and expertise.
And kind of--
MARK BLYTH: AMD, Anaconda, Aprio, Astral, Google,
Huawei, Intel, Laplev, Meta, NVIDIA, Preferred Networks,
Probable, QuantSight, and Red Hat.
That's a bit of a group working on this.
VINCENT DELAMON: And you can see just above all the different
open source project that different OSS and lead
maintainers have contributed time and energy
to kind of try to make this move forward.
So it is quite a few people.
Yeah, most notably maybe QPy and PyTorch possibly.
I mean, they're all--
Maybe one company that is not too well known,
and undeservingly, because they should,
which is probable at the bottom that you mentioned,
which is essentially the support company behind scikit-learn.
So if people don't know it, Probable is essentially representing site.
Yeah, so this is wheelnext.dev.
This is basically the website for the group, the working group, something like that.
Yep.
We try to leave our notes, our thinking, our drafts.
One aspect that I really like on the work that we did
is that it kind of felt like a startup.
We were making a mockup and iterating very fast
and getting feedback and this, I don't like this,
I don't like this, I don't like change it.
I worked really closely with two people,
one from Quantside, one from Astro, Constantine and Michel,
and we did so many hours of work,
so many different prototypes iterating,
having exposing the work to people, collecting feedback,
adjusting, and repeating the cycle so many times
until we finally got to something
that we thought was reasonable.
And that's where we started to write the PEP essentially.
But that process took us a year.
- All right, well, we should probably jump into the PEPs.
And I'll tell you what,
you all have quite the authorship attribution here,
But also, I believe, correct me if I'm wrong,
that this PEP is notable in that it's the longest PEP ever,
something like that, right?
- Yeah, I don't know if it's an achievement to be proud of.
- It's the most powerful PEP ever written.
- Yes.
- It's a super PEP.
So, so much so that, so we're talking about PEP 817
wheel variants, which is the variant thing
that we actually are talking about, not the other variants,
beyond platform tags.
but then so much so that it actually got kicked to the curb for like, well,
what is the minimal viable PEP of this PEP?
And so he can take it in steps and Jonathan,
you just told me really good news that PEP.
So you spun off this other PEP, PEP 825 wheel variance package format,
which is smaller, which still has a significant authorship,
but that this was just, it says draft, but is that true?
Yes, so perhaps maybe Ralph, you want to discuss a little about what's the process of PEP that I think that's--
Yeah, so--
That would be important.
When you submit a PEP, it first, you know, submit it on GitHub and then there's a group of folks called the PEP editors who basically just edit, you know, they review it for clarity, you know, language, consistency with other PEPs and so on.
So they don't really look at the content of what you're proposing.
So just as long as it's clear, they're happy, you merge it in.
But because the first PAP was already so long,
that process took like over a month already.
But at that point, it's merged as draft.
And then you go to the Python packaging discourse
where you say, okay, here's our PAP.
Now, please, let's start the actual community review.
And then basically anybody with an opinion can weigh in.
And it's a form.
there's not even a threaded forum.
So it's just one long thread of comments,
which tends to make it like a little challenging.
The more complex the topic gets,
the harder it is to make sense of this conversation.
- It's really hard to have a threaded
multi-component conversation, it is.
- Exactly.
So that's one of the reasons it's now split
into smaller parts.
So you can at least have separate threads
about different topics, right?
Because especially not all of the parts of the design apply to everybody.
When we're talking about installers, we want to hear primarily from the authors of uv and
PIP, Poetry, Hatch, PDM.
But if we're talking about how do you build a wheel, well, we have to talk primarily to
setup tools, scikit, build core, mess on Python, the build backends.
And the index server the same.
want to know that the pi pi maintainers are happy so that's why you know organizing this review and
chopping it up into complex parts it's still going to be really hard to get the right amount of
feedback but we now have like the first pr you know the first merge path in draft status so it's
going to only be accepted once the whole review community review process is done and probably what
will happen is it's going to be provisionally accepted only because we know there's like three
more paths coming for the other parts and eventually like the you know you want you want all four to be
you know working and accepted like you know we now have prototypes but you know we want the
prototypes for the final design and have like you know the tool author say like yeah this works for
us before you really go from provisional to actually accept it
amazing so yeah this is this is part of what i get out when i said at the beginning that this
touches like every part of the packaging stack there's just like that it's very hard to break
it up into i mean that's what we're trying to do in some sense but like it's from the start it's
been hard it's hard to there aren't necessarily super great cut points because it does affect
how you build packages how you publish them like how they get hosted and served from the registry
how installers look at them and understand them, all of those things, like marker syntax,
all of that stuff gets impacted in different ways.
It's very funny.
As we were prototyping this for a year, we ended up pretty much forking the entire ecosystem.
It got forked.
It got forks.
Warehouse got forked.
Packaging got forked.
Like absolutely every package in the ecosystem had been forked.
because we needed to test our implementation.
And we needed to --
The goal, of course, is to un-fork those things.
Yes.
Yeah.
It's to re-emerge that.
But we needed to have a playground to be able to experiment
and see how the concept that we were developing was functioning
in pip and then in packaging, but then also in setup tools,
and then in scikit build core, and then in Python method.
But it just keeps spreading essentially
to every single corner of the packaging, installation,
and distribution aspect of Python.
So that was pretty funny.
Yeah.
What--
Yeah, we have a fork in uv.
Or I guess, technically, it's just a branch
that Constantine on our team on here on the PEP
has been-- who's been super involved--
oh, thanks-- who's been super involved throughout
done a ton of work on basically implementing the standard in uv. So we have like a working
implementation that we've used to,  yeah, you can actually install it,  from, you know,
we basically distribute it to a slightly different URL so you can install it and test it. but,
uh, yeah, that's been, that fork has evolved a lot or that branch has evolved a lot and it's
been a lot of work to,  it's been incredibly helpful for the design process for us to understand
like what's hard, what's easy. And then,  I also think it's important for PES just to have
working implementations too. And I mean, a lot of people agree that's not an awful point, but
that's been one of the goals too, is to show what it's like in practice and that it actually works.
So people want to play around with this. An easy way might be to try to use this fork.
We put a lot of work to actually make it go ahead and try it. Because I think it's...
I personally have a lot of admiration for the work done in free-threading Python.
especially to the  PEP and i think sam gross who is the main author managed to make significant
amount of progress as he was coming up with prototypes that uh it's not just my word let
me show you to you it works and yeah there was so much skepticism around that idea of free
threaded python he had to had to show not tell but i think if we didn't do the work similarly on
variant enabled wheels, people would have told us, oh, well, resolution is too slow. It's going to
slow down the installer too much. And Astro is probably one of the installers that care the most
about speed. So we need to both convince us, but also Charlie's and his team to be...
Yeah, and we had plenty of feedback on that front too. Well, during the design,
we were like, no, this is going to be too slow, or like, this is like a better way to do it,
But I like this little snippet because this is basically, if you haven't felt this pain,
it might not be meaningful to you.
But if you've worked with PyTorch, this is what we want to enable.
You don't have to configure a specific index URL that captures the CUDA variant or anything
like that.
You just say, hey, install Torch.
And then in this variant-enabled build, uv would go look at Torch.
It would see, OK, Torch, it has different variants
for different CUDA versions.
And here's how I inspect what CUDA version I should use
on your machine.
And then it would pick out the right version
based on what's supported by the GPU that's running.
That should all happen.
And users shouldn't have to think about configuring it
effectively is what we have been working towards.
ANDREAS SULLIVAN: And in the future,
the first line doesn't exist.
Because right now, the first line is just
here to install this Vientenable.
JOHN MUELLER: Yeah, that just installs the fork.
Yeah.
For people listening and not watching, what they mean by those lines, there's three lines
here to say how to use this.
It says curl.
Oh, sorry.
Basically, yeah, no worries.
It's the install statement for uv, which is typical, except for that it overrides the
download URL.
The download URL.
It's a different URL, which is index.astral.sh.
We distribute a separate variant-enabled experimental, quote-unquote, prototype build.
Right.
And then you just create a virtual environment, uv, VNV, and then you just uv pip install.
like normal, but it handles this.
And Charlie, we spoke, I think on the pyx episode
about just how large some of these things are
like PyTorch and others that are compiled.
You can't just download everything,
all the variations into one wheel.
I mean, I guess you could, but it'd be crazy, right?
That's actually a big benefit, right?
Right now you go to PyPI, you download the PyTorch wheel,
it'll be about 900 megabytes.
you could make it small.
Part of the reason it's so large is, again, these fat binaries.
The NumPy ones are a few megabytes.
The PyTorch ones have a bunch of CUDA inside
for five or six different CUDA architectures.
It loads very, very quickly.
Actually, the PyTorch team has to try incredibly hard
to stay under one gigabyte.
If we have variants, we can just slim it down
to one CUDA architecture per wheel.
So you can go down to like 200 megabytes or so, 250 maybe.
But it's way better for both for index servers.
It's better for users.
It's going to be pretty slow too.
The only thing is not better for it's CI
servers that have to build all these different things
if you start sharding.
But that's a one-time cost that at the end ends up being--
it's much better to have a slight increase one time
and massive decrease scalable essentially.
Yeah, you build it once, it gets installed a million times.
That's a massive difference.
And it's also better for the warehouse folks like PyPI.
It's easy for people to just assume pip install,
uv pip install, that sort of stuff is going to work.
But the cost of just the bandwidth in that infrastructure
is astronomical, which is crazy.
So this is going to be a major benefit for bandwidth.
Yeah, and also install speed.
You'll also benefit from that because you're no longer
downloading as much stuff to actually install PyTorch.
I mean, if you use uv, it's got some really good caching,
and it's pretty quick.
Oh, but it doesn't multiply your bandwidth by magic.
I wish Charlie could find a solution to that.
I haven't yet.
But yeah, if you're downloading Torch and all the NVIDIA, all the CUDA stuff, it's, yeah.
It's hefty.
It's a large number of megabytes.
Crazy.
All right, let's see.
Let's talk real quick about the PyPackaging Native Guide, and then I want to get an update on pyx real quick before we go.
So, Ralph, this is your project, right?
Tell us about this.
Yes.
Okay, so I've been watching discussions about some of the topics we've talked about in this
episode since 2010 or so in Python packaging.
And even back then, long before we had wheels, NumPy, for example, had different.exe installers
that we would upload to PyPI.
There would be one named _sse2, one _sse3, and user had just picked the right.exe and
install it on their Windows machine.
And then we would go to--
Wow, I had no idea.
OK.
Yes, it was not fun.
And actually, this is by far the hardest thing
when I became NumPy release manager,
because we had to build these things on Linux under Wine,
and there were no instructions, and there were really janky
scripts.
So it took me three months to get the first release out.
But yeah, so I saw all these discussions about this
2 and SEC 3 and like you know the pip authors and you know most of the people who work with pure
python like you know the devops folks the you know web framework folks they had no idea about this and
and usually these conversations went in circles because when you explain something to one person
the next person would come in and like you know this is endless mailing strats that would never go
anywhere so after you know seeing that for 12 13 years or so i you know finally got tired of that
I thought I'm going to write a reference site that explains the problem.
I don't want to propose any solutions, but just explain the problem.
So the next time someone starts a new conversation about, you know,
CMD extensions or about GPUs or, you know,
about some of the issues with mixing, you know, source and binary distributions.
Just link to this site, like, please use that.
It's the best approach at trying to summarize the problem, you know.
So we have a baseline to start talking about solutions.
And I think, you know, Jonathan, you know, as one of the people who saw this,
I think a lot of people read this, but it was a nice basis to, you know,
just point at this is like, there are your problem descriptions and, you know,
for the GPU part, like Nvidia folks really helped to make sure that all the
explanations of the problems were correct.
So when we started Wheel Next, we could just start talking about like, okay,
what are the solutions here?
This website is absolutely incredible.
It's amazing.
Yeah, it's amazing.
The work that Ralph and every contributor to this website
have made, this is by far the best explanation anywhere
on the internet to all these packaging issues.
And I really like the perspective
that Ralph has took, which is don't state the solution,
just focus on stating the problem very clear.
and and then with real next we try to take the exact flip coin flip side of the coin which is
don't focus on the problem it's already explained just focus on proposing one solution to some of
the problems and this is how we created real next i love it you know one of the big problems
challenges i guess is if you don't fully understand the problem space you could be debating two
different things and one person sees a really important angle the other person doesn't even see
that angle there they have a different perspective that they're arguing for optimizing for and so
yeah it's sort of a little bit like the wheel next stuff like let's get everyone involved and
see all the angles and then discuss it right exactly cool all right well you know the you
know the saying a problem well stated is a problem half solved so this is that is an awesome
exactly what we are trying to say.
I love it.
All right.
Let's,
I want to get a quick update on pyx since I feel like Charlie,
you're right in the middle of this.
I know pyx was looking to solve some of these problems as well.
Give us the elevator pitch and just,
we have a whole episode on this from,
I don't know,
six months ago or something,
but yeah,
give us the,
what's the situation here and does this change things on how you're
handling things?
Yeah.
For sure.
It's really,
yeah.
pyx is our hosted package registry.
And it's in beta right now.
So we're live with a bunch of great customers.
The goal of pyx is basically to enable us
to solve more of the packaging problems that we see in the uv
issue tracker by having our own registry that we think
is well implemented and solves problems
that we see that other registries don't really solve.
Like basically from the start, the way that we've approached the wheel, these like problems around the GPU stuff is from like two perspectives.
And in pyx, we're really just focused in terms of how it overlaps with wheel variants.
We're really just focused on the GPU part.
But the way that we've approached it has basically been try to push the standards forward as much as we can.
And that's what we've been doing in this effort.
and then simultaneously try to figure out how we can help users until the standards change.
And so pyx has more been in that second camp of assuming that standards don't change,
because we don't want to unilaterally start changing a bunch of things without going through the process.
How can we make the world a little bit easier for people who are working with this kind of stuff?
So for example, in pyx, we take a lot of packages that are PyTorch extensions or need to be built against CUDA,
and we build those.
We build them across a wide range of CUDA versions,
PyTorch versions, Python versions, CPU architectures,
and we make those available to users.
So it doesn't solve the core problem of how do you build
and distribute this stuff, but it does
mean that if you're operating within the constraints
of the current set of standards, we
can make people's lives easier by making it so they don't
have to build so many things.
We build them well, they all work together,
all that kind of stuff.
So that's what we've been focused on.
And I think looking forward, our goal is to support WheelVariance as soon as possible
and put those into the registry.
So as soon as we feel like that's a feasible thing to do on the registry,
we'll support it in pyx and support it for our users and our customers.
But in the meantime, it's kind of been like a parallel track effort
of pushing forward on all the WheelNext work and standards
and then just trying to solve immediate user problems
without changing standards, like partly through the registry.
Okay. Things are going good at pyx? You're making progress?
Yeah. We're making progress. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's good.
Customers are growing. Numbers are growing up. It's good.
Awesome. People want to try pyx? What are they?
They can join the wait list here. Yeah. Yeah.
This is, you know, you just, we have a, yeah,
or you can go to ash.pyx and we look at all the responses and we basically
onboard people one by one.
Okay. So talking about when is this stuff going to be ready? You'll be able to adopt it. I guess
maybe that's a good place to close out our conversation here is what's the timeline?
What are expectations? How are things going? What's next?
It's a great question.
As everything is open source, it's a two month delay.
What's the party line on this question?
Oh, gosh.
Well, it's...
It's next time.
I liked...
We have a joke inside...
I don't know if it's inside Widespread, inside WeOnX,
but we call this the Varys Force Law.
Varso Force Law.
I don't remember exactly how...
Which is essentially make an estimate,
multiply it by two, and change the unit.
So if you think it's going to take six months,
it's one year.
Oh, no.
Change the unit one decade.
And it's a running joke that we have that I think is really good.
Realistically, I think it depends on where are we going to set the bar for starting to roll things out.
So as Ralph was saying, we'll probably see some provision here accepted.
But as we get to that point, some of the stuff will be possible.
For example, I expect that little by little, we can start experimenting with things without
getting necessarily to the absolute final stage, but the full feature will be available
to the app at the last stage.
So, complicated question to answer.
We hope that it's not going to take too many years.
I'll make a connection back to pyx here, because I think, you know, there's part is like, okay,
there's four PAPs that need to be reviewed.
Probably we need to update some prototypes here and there.
It's probably going to take, you know, the better part of this year.
At that point, you know, you have accepted PAPs, right?
But then PyPI needs to be updated.
Like, you know, all the tools that, like Twine,
would need to be updated.
Like there's a new metadata version.
So everything that consumes that needs to be updated
before, you know, package authors can actually start producing
these wheels and upload them to PyPI.
So that's going to not be this year.
There's a very long tail of how the implementation rolls through the ecosystem, and then you have
to wait until users get newer tools, and then only then can you start uploading wheels.
So I'm going to poke at Charlie a bit here, because one of the advantages of having a separate
registry is, plus the ability to rebuild everything, you can start using variant wheels like the
moment that everything is accepted. It's way sooner. Have you thought about that? That is true. Yeah, yeah, of course. Yeah. I think from our perspective, we're mostly like, do we feel like design is done or how much churn will there be on the design? But yeah, we're definitely in a position to like start building and distributing this stuff much, much sooner.
uv has a second advantage, which is I think they have a much shorter tail of users in terms of version.
I think uv users end up on a much more quote-unquote recent version.
If you look at pip, I think, I don't remember the statistic on top of my head,
but a still significant portion of users use five-year-old version of pip,
which I don't even know which version of Python.
It was 3.9 or something.
So it is, it is, uv is able to move a lot faster, but also the users are more reactive.
That's a very interesting point.
I mean, I think a lot of people who are very tuned into the Python space have switched to uv, started using uv.
And there's probably a lot of people who don't read the newsletters, don't listen to the podcast and so on.
And they know pip and they just keep on pipping, which is fine, not knocking it.
But, you know, it, it means not only are these in pip, they might be using an older version of Python, because they don't want to, they don't want to shake it up. And, you know, that, that those are going to be the long tails that are going to be hard. I guess one more thought about what's next here before we call this a show here.
What is the minimal? We talked about a  PEP 825, the minimal pep. What is the minimal amount of
adoption? Right? So if if the top five biggest data science and machine learning libraries adopt this,
and the installer tools like uv and pip and support it, that actually alone might be a really big
benefit if all the other packages are just ignored, right? So that's way more achievable than every
single package that has native code has all these specifiers right what's what's the minimum level
of adoption i would say that i mean the minimum level at which you can call the success yeah five
is probably not that far off the benefits start to accumulate quickly but i would expect
once packages like pytorch start adopting this especially in a deep learning space you know
this will be adopted very widely, very quickly, because it's all so many problems.
Like many of the most popular packages like VLLM, but very large development teams and very large numbers of users.
If you look at their install pages, it's like, you know, it's like a puzzle book.
You just don't know how to install this stuff.
And they don't have wheels on PyPI and they have their own extra index servers.
And it's not for lack of trying.
It's not for lack of trying.
Like those teams like put a lot of effort into trying to make it easier to install.
but they basically all run into different kinds of roadblocks.
I think five packages is what you'll get after maybe two weeks.
After a month, you will get twice that amount
and probably a quadratic progression for quite a few weeks.
But it's, especially in the scientific compute space
and maybe machine learning to be more specific,
well, the moment that it works, so many packages will switch,
like so many.
If you just take PyTorch, half of its dependencies
will probably activate variant mode.
And then the people that build on top of PyTorch
are people who build on top of Jax.
So just that, you end up with at least 50 packages
in a matter of a few months.
I was thinking there's probably a very small set
that are feeling the most pain and are most--
you could do direct outreach to just the most important
projects and get that adopted and make a really big difference,
even if it's not every package.
But the funny part is that most of the packages that
would be interested that we would reach out
to already part of We Are Next.
Because they, in some way, find the pain really significant
and are starving for a solution.
JOHN MUELLER: They know.
They already know.
All right, let's call it a show, folks.
Let's-- final call to action.
People out there listening, either they're
maintainers of packages or they're
users of these libraries or whatever.
They got their own open source project.
They're seeing the light.
They want to get involved.
They want to try it out.
What do you tell them?
Well, first, it would be great if people were to come on discuss.python.org.
That's where the community is trying to aggregate to discuss all these different proposals.
So I think the more people get involved, the more better.
But also trying the different packages that we are trying to publish that Charlize has been helping us and his team has been helping us to create a sort of end-to-end experience.
I think right now we have example of Linux, macOS, and Windows. It works on different type of hardware, different type of CPUs, different type of GPUs.
it works pretty broadly and we wanted to give a sort of a
sample flavor of what could be a variant-enabled world
yeah i'd say yeah for the majority of listeners they're not going to be packaging tool authors
right so those are the ones you would expect to participate in in the review primarily but it's a
if you're a user of any of the packages we mentioned just try it out you know download
the uv variant enabled installer and if you're a package author and like we haven't mentioned your
package but it will solve a problem for you like get in touch because i think that's maybe the most
you know relevant part here there's like at least you know hundreds maybe thousands of packages you
know that we think we have answers for but if their solution or their problem statement is
slightly different i think now would be a great time to learn and make sure we cover as many use
cases possible yeah i mean i guess the only thing i'd say is ideally the average user won't even
have to think about this right and hopefully it's just hopefully they just get it through uv or
through pip or whatever um in the long term but that's that may take time but that's our goal
certainly yeah it's all behind the scenes they don't know but certainly if it solves a problem
reach out and be part of it.
Jonathan,
Ralph, Charlie, thanks for being on the show.
It's been great. Keep up the good work.
Thanks for having us.
Bye.